Hi everybody, my name is Ryan Johnson and I'm a Data Science Advisor here at Posit
and I'm really excited to be back for another Positeam workflow demo
where I'll be discussing Positron, Posit's newest IDE.
Now in a second we're going to jump into a few slides and talk about Positron
but then we're going to spend the remainder of today inside of Positron
doing some data science that's powered by AI.
So without further ado let's go ahead and jump into it and get started.
All right so let's first talk about what is Positron.
For this demo we're going to define Positron as an AI-ready multilingual IDE for data scientists
but of course it can do a whole lot more.
Now if you've never heard of Positron before maybe you've heard of rstudio.
rstudio is an IDE that we developed at Posit probably 15 years ago at this point.
It's extremely stable, it's beloved by our users and it really is optimized for data science
because as you're working with data you're creating variables which you can actually
interact with in the variables pane and maybe you're creating plots or tables
which you can also interact with and see directly inside of the IDE itself.
Now there's also another popular IDE it's called VS Code and while you can't do data
science in VS Code this tends to be an IDE that's extremely popular amongst software developers
because it is multilingual so you can use R, Python, Julia, HTML, JavaScript.
It's extremely customizable and in newer versions of VS Code it actually comes
AI-equipped with things like GitHub Copilot.
So when designing Positron we really wanted to take the best of both worlds.
So we wanted to take the features that make rstudio optimize for data science and bring
that into Positron and then also bring in some of the cool features of VS Code
to create this perfect data science focused IDE.
Now again if you've never seen Positron before this is what it looks like in all of its glory.
And you'll first notice that there's a lot of windows and buttons to click
but we can actually just break down Positron into four components.
Over here on the left hand side we're going to call this like your
manage area where you can manage things like what files are in your project.
You can manage things like version control, your extensions which we'll talk about in a little bit.
That's all done over here on the left hand side.
Now as you begin writing code whether it be an R script, a Python script, a Shiny application,
a core code document, that's all going to be done right here in the top middle of your screen.
And typically when you open up Positron for the first time you'll see this
welcome page with some helpful links and buttons.
Now as you go to run code whether it be R or Python code because Positron supports both,
that's done down here at the very bottom where you get an interactive console.
And again you can switch over to a Python console very easily.
Now as you begin working with data again you're probably going to be creating things like
variables or subsets of your data and they're going to be stored in memory.
So any variables that you're creating you can actually see them over here in the top right hand
corner and then any plots or tables you're creating it will show up down here.
There's also a viewer tab up here so if you're running things like a Shiny application or you
render an HTML document, a core code document, that's all going to be done over here on the
right hand side which really helps you understand your data.
So that's kind of the Positron 101, but for today's demo we're going to be focusing on some
of the AI features that we've either built into Positron or as built as an extension of Positron.
And the first one that we're going to get practice leveraging today
is something called Positron Assistant.
So Positron Assistant again is an AI client that is directly built into Positron.
In fact on the left hand side of Positron you'll probably see this little robot face,
that is how you can access Positron Assistant.
And Positron Assistant can do a lot of great things and you can also interact with it in a
lot of different ways.
So when you click this little robot face it'll open this sidebar and you'll get a text box down
There is another way where you can interact with Positron Assistant known as inline edits and
we'll talk about that here in a second.
But something that's really important about Positron Assistant as well as a lot of the
other AI tools that we're building for Positron is that this tool is model agnostic and it follows
our bring your own LLM or bring your own model philosophy.
Now currently we don't have a model for Positron, but we do have a model for Positron that we
Now currently with Positron Assistant as of today it's still in preview support.
We do only support Anthropic but we are actively testing out other models with the hopes that
whatever model your company or group is approved to use that you can bring that model to the table.
And so what does that look like?
So here's a window that you can open up in Positron where you can select your various model.
Again, currently we only support Anthropic,
but here you can see some other models that we're testing out including AWS Bedrock,
Gemini, GitHub Copilot is supported currently for code completion,
but we will hopefully support it as a full-fledged LLM in the near future and others as well.
And setting up these models is super simple.
Like, for example, with Anthropic, you can just apply an API key.
It tends to work pretty seamlessly.
Now the other important thing to note about Positron Assistant is that it is designed
for data science.
And when I say that, I mean that it's designed to have context awareness.
So when you start interacting with it, it knows about your data science environment.
So what do I mean by that?
So here I have another picture of Positron and here's Positron Assistant over here on
the left-hand side and I purposely gave it these really creepy eyeballs because
as you interact with Positron Assistant and you ask it questions down here,
it can actually see your environment.
Things like what scripts do you have open?
What variables do you have stored in memory?
What plots or tables have you created?
What code have you run and what output from that code was run?
It can see that.
That way, when you ask it questions, typically the suggestions that Positron Assistant just
tend to work immediately.
Another way to think about this is if maybe you're using like ChatGPT or Gemini to help
with some code assistance, you're using like the web interface.
If you have a code question, typically you have to copy and paste all of your code, copy
and paste the error message, potentially copy and paste a subset of your data in order to
give that model enough context to provide hopefully a useful suggestion.
But with Positron Assistant, you don't have to do that.
You can give it a simple request and it will understand your context and provide suggestions
that, again, just tend to work.
Now, that text box down here in the sidebar is one way to leverage Positron Assistant.
But there's another one known as inline code suggestions, which we'll do in today's demo
as well.
But the idea here is that maybe you have a script open.
It could be a Quarto document like in this screenshot.
It could be an R script, a Python script, a Shiny app.
And you can place your cursor somewhere in this document and hit Control-I if you're
in a Windows machine or Command-I if you're on a Mac machine.
And it opens up this little text box.
And this is Positron Assistant.
You can ask it questions and it will provide suggestions inline with the rest of your code.
Now, Positron Assistant is one tool that we're going to focus in on today.
But the other one is something called DataBot.
Now, DataBot is actually available as an extension.
So, it's not built into Positron like Positron Assistant.
It's available as an extension.
And in a second, we'll kind of show you where that lives and how you can install extensions
inside of Positron.
But to talk a little bit about DataBot, I first want to help clarify, like, when to
use DataBot and when to use Positron Assistant.
DataBot is specifically designed to do exploratory data analysis and to do it really fast.
And actually, it's surprisingly a lot of fun.
So, imagine you get some brand new data thrown at you and you want to analyze it.
That is a really good use case for DataBot.
Now, for Positron Assistant, this can certainly do a lot of things that DataBot can do.
But it tends to be more task-focused.
So, maybe you have an error that you need to debug or you have a plot you want to approve
or you want to create, like, an individual table.
Those are really great tasks for Positron Assistant.
Now, the way that DataBot works to do this exploratory data analysis is it implements
what we're calling this where loop.
So, you have some data and you want to learn more about that data.
So, you ask DataBot to start analyzing it.
And what it's going to do is first write some R or Python code.
It will execute that code immediately, analyze the results, regroup with suggestions,
and then just wait for your next instructions.
And this will just go around and around and around in circles until you're happy with
the results and you've gleaned all the information you need from that data.
Now, it's also important to note that this where loop and also the way that Positron
Assistant works is that it's all code-based.
All the suggestions you're getting from DataBot are just code suggestions.
And we think that code is the most auditable way to explore data with AI.
Because you're not just asking it a question and then sending it off into some black box
and getting a magical response.
You are actually getting code.
You can see that code.
You can approve that code before it actually gets run.
All right.
So, with that, we're going to jump into Positron.
And we're going to demo all these really cool features we just talked about.
So, the first thing we'll do is we're going to give you all just a little Positron 101,
get you comfortable with the user interface.
We're then going to step into doing some AI-powered data science.
And we're going to begin with Positron Assistant.
And we're going to use Positron Assistant to help us debug an error.
We're then going to improve a GG plot.
And then we'll even create a GT table from scratch.
And then we're going to wrap up today by doing some fast exploratory data analysis with DataBot.
All right.
So, I'm going to go ahead and switch over to my demo environment for today.
And I'm going to be using an instance of Positeam.
And just for awareness, Positeam is our bundled offering of our three professional data science
tools.
We have Posit Workbench for doing your development.
We have Posit Connect for sharing all the insights that you're creating with others.
And then we have Posit Package Manager for organizing, centralizing,
and delivering all those amazing open-source R and Python packages.
Now, for today's session, we're pretty much going to be staying within Posit Workbench.
So, I'll go ahead and click on this tile.
And here is the new Posit Workbench homepage.
So, if anyone here has used Posit Workbench in the past,
you may notice that the landing page for Posit Workbench looks a little bit different.
So, in our most recent release back in September of 2025,
we've modernized and just, I think, makes it a lot better looking,
this landing page for Posit Workbench.
And you can see all these various rows on this landing page.
And these are all various projects that I've been working within and various directories.
But for today's session, we're going to go ahead and kick on a brand new session.
So, I'm going to click New Session at the top of my screen.
And we get this pop-up window.
And at the very top of this pop-up window,
here are currently the five IDEs that we support within Posit Workbench.
So, we have Jupyter Notebooks and JupyterLab,
which tend to be more popular with our Python users,
but you can certainly use R in it as well.
We have RStudio, which has always been a member of Posit Workbench,
great for R development.
We have VS Code, a great all-purpose editor.
And then importantly, you'll see right here in the middle,
the newest member of the IDE family, Positron.
And that's what we're going to be using today.
So, we can go ahead and change the name of the session if we want to,
but I'll just leave it as Positron Pro Session 2.
I do want to talk a little bit about session credentials here,
because I think it's a really cool feature that's unique to Posit Workbench.
If your data or assets live in something like AWS in this example,
or potentially it lives in Databricks or Snowflake,
you'll know that when you go to access that data,
you typically have to create like an access token
and then apply it to your various IDE environments.
And it can be a bit of a hassle.
Here with session credentials, you can click on any of the tiles,
sign in, and then your credentials will be applied
to your various sessions automatically.
So, it can really help save some time and some headaches
in making sure that you can connect to your data and assets in Posit Workbench.
Here we've created a custom Docker image to deploy these various sessions within.
And then lastly, you'll see cluster options.
So, this demo environment is actually running in a compute cluster.
And the advantage here is that I can actually set my resource profile.
So, if I want to have just the default settings with one CPU,
about four gigs of memory, that's probably fine for today.
But maybe I want to do a medium setup with a little bit more CPU,
a little bit more memory.
And these settings are actually pretty easy to set up.
So, I'll go ahead and select medium, and we'll go ahead and launch the session.
All right, you'll see at the very top, the Positron Pro session is now launching.
We'll give it a few seconds.
Now it's dropping us right inside of Positron.
All right, so, here we go.
This is Positron Pro.
So, here we go.
This is Positron.
I'll just go ahead.
I'm going to set up the stacked workflow.
So, if you see in the top right corner, these various icons,
I like to use this stacked layout,
because it kind of emulates what you'll see inside of RStudio.
Okay, so, when you open up Positron for the very first time,
this is typically what you'll see.
You'll have your welcome page here.
You have the sidebar off to the left-hand side.
And the first thing that I want you to notice is
that Positron really, really, really wants you to open up a folder.
All right, you can see in the welcome screen,
has open folder, new folder, new from Git.
You can open a folder here, clone a repository,
or you can click the dropdown, open a folder here.
And that's typically how you should operate
with your various data science projects,
is that they should be inside of a folder.
So, we're actually going to pull in a project from a Git repository.
So, I'm actually going to select this new from Git icon
from within this welcome page.
And we'll get this window where we need to supply a URL
for our Git repository.
So, here's a project on GitHub,
a repository that we've created for some workshops.
And I'm going to go ahead and just grab this URL,
come on back to Positron and paste it in.
And then we'll click OK.
Now, anytime you create a new project inside of Positron,
it always opens up a new Positron session.
So, we'll give it a few seconds here to boot up.
All right, here we go.
And we'll know we're in the right place
because we see now over here on the left-hand side,
this icon in the very top left, this like page icon.
This is your file explorer where you can see
what files or datasets are inside of your current project.
So, these are all the files that I just pulled
into my Git repository.
And if we just quickly run through them,
you'll see there's some CSV files
and they correspond to various years from 2015 to 2019.
We're going to be exploring this data here in a second.
You'll also notice that there's some QMD files,
which again stands for Quarto.
And we'll be talking through some of these as well,
including the Python one and this R one.
There's also a README file down here
and an RNVLOC file, which is associated with the RM package
that we created here at Posit.
Now, we'll also know we're in the right place
if you look in the top right corner,
you'll see the Positron AI Workshop one.
That's the directory that I'm currently working within.
All right, so to get started here,
let me just navigate you from the left-hand side,
this ribbon over here.
I mentioned in the slides, Positron Assistant.
That's the little robot face down here.
We're in a very short amount of time.
We're going to actually open up Positron Assistant
and play around with it.
But I want to get you kind of familiar
with the rest of Positron.
So kind of moving through some of these icons,
you know, we would highly encourage you
to play around with them,
see what these various icons do.
But I just want to point out a few of them.
The first one here is source control, version control.
Now, I've been an RStudio user for like over a decade
and the get features inside of RStudio are good.
But I would say that the get features inside of Positron
just take it to a whole new level.
All right, you can see here this repository,
all the various commits that we've added.
We have the ability to access a lot more get commands
directly within Positron.
And if needed to, you always have access to the terminal
if you need to access get more natively.
And then the other icon I want to point out for right now
is going to be these squares.
These are known as your extensions.
Now, for anyone here who has never used VS Code before,
this may be a bit of a foreign concept,
but extensions are a way for you to install these extensions
that help kind of modify
and fine tune your developer experience.
Now, by clicking on this extensions icon,
it actually shows you all the ones
that are currently installed,
including this, you know,
our language support formatter called air,
which is really cool.
But importantly, the second one down here
is data bot.
So data bot, that extension I talked about
to do fast exploratory data analysis.
And we're actually going to talk about this one
here in a little bit.
And you'll see it as a few other ones as well
that we pre-installed into this demo environment.
But if you wanted to install another one,
you can search the marketplace up here
and search for, you know,
whatever extension you want.
And what's really cool about Positron
is that it's built on the same open source framework
as VS Code.
So for the most part,
any extension you use in VS Code
will also work in Positron.
Now, the only other thing I'll mention for right now
to get you familiar with Positron
is this search bar at the very top.
Again, if you're a VS Code user,
this should look familiar.
But if you're an RStudio user,
this may be a new feature.
And it's a really important one in Positron
because it can do a variety of things.
But what I want to point out for right now
is something known as your command palette.
And there's a few ways
you can access the command palette.
You could click this search bar
and select show and run commands.
It essentially just puts a little
greater than symbol there.
That's one way.
Or it is a keyboard shortcut.
So I'm on a Mac machine,
it's command shift P.
I think it'd be control shift P
if you're on a Windows machine.
And then here's all the various commands.
And you can see some of them
are associated with extensions like air.
There's so many to choose from.
It could certainly be a little bit overwhelming.
But just know that this actually has
really nice like fuzzy searching.
So for example, if I wanted to open up a file,
if I didn't know the actual command,
I could just say like file open,
something like that.
And there you go, open file.
All right.
So in order to get kind of familiar
with the rest of Positron,
we're actually going to first
open up a core to a document.
Now, before I do that,
I want you to take your attention up here
to the top right.
You'll see currently in this Positron session,
I'm running R version 4.4.0.
Now I mentioned before that Positron
right out of the box
is designed to work equally well
with both R and Python.
So I could easily click this button,
select a new interpreter,
and open up a Python session.
And that would work perfectly fine.
But what I could also do is
you'll see there's a core to a document
called python.qmd.
So let me go ahead and click on this file.
Again, it's going to open up here in the top middle.
And you can always click and drag
the dividers of Positron
to give you some more space.
Now, if you're not familiar with quarto,
in a lot of ways,
they're similar to like R Markdown
and also Jupyter Notebooks.
It's a way for you to combine both code.
You can see these like gray code cells
with some text here,
which will ultimately get rendered to HTML.
All right.
Now, by opening up this Python
core to a document,
you'll notice something kind of cool.
That Positron automatically detected
that this core to a document
includes Python code.
So without me doing anything else,
Positron automatically opened up
a Python kernel for me.
So now you can see I currently have
Python version 3.12.3 running.
And I could even switch back to my R version.
This is an insanely powerful feature of Positron
where you can have both R and Python
running at the same time.
You can even have multiple R versions
and multiple Python versions
all running at the exact same time.
And they all have their unique environment.
Now, if I was to run a cell here within Python,
so I can click run cell here above line eight,
and it's going to do some things
like import some packages,
but it's also going to create
a variable called happiness.
And what this line of Python
here on line 16 does
is it reads in a CSV file
that's in my project.
It's this file over here, 2019.
And so by doing so,
you'll notice over here again
in our sessions pane,
we now have some variables created.
And this is a powerful feature of Positron.
You can see the variables you've created
and you can actually interact with them.
So here I've created this happiness data.
And if I click on this grid icon,
it's going to open up
our interactive data viewer
inside of Positron.
So let me click on this.
All right, you'll see that
it opens up here in the middle,
but I'm actually going to
hide some of my windows here
to give us some more space.
And I think this is an important thing
as you get more comfortable
using Positron to be aware of windows,
sidebars, and you can always hide them
and pop them back in.
A lot of that you can do up here
in the top right hand corner.
So right now I don't need my files
pane over here on the left hand side.
So I'll hide that.
I'm going to go ahead and hide
this sidebar off to the right,
which I can click this right one here.
And I'll go ahead and hide my console,
which is the middle button.
And now we can see this really cool data
viewer in all of its glory.
So this is looking at, again,
at this happiness variable data set
that we created.
And if you see here,
we get a nice scrollable view.
This is in a lot of ways
similar to the data viewer
inside of RStudio,
but it's a little bit more powerful.
And we can also see over here
on the left hand side,
all the various columns
and information about
those various columns,
like if they're numeric or a character,
and you can click on them
and get some more statistics
about each individual column.
Now this data set,
and I'll just point you
to two columns here,
you'll see it's looking
at various countries,
and then they're being assigned
like a happiness score,
like how happy are
these various countries.
It also includes some other
information like GDP,
social support,
and it gives various scores
there as well.
So with this data viewer,
what you can actually do
is you can interact with a column
by clicking these three dots.
You can sort them.
You can also add a filter.
So for example,
if I wanted to filter
all the various rows here
where the score is,
let's say greater than seven.
I've now done that.
And then maybe I also want
to filter my countries.
Or maybe I'll filter the rank actually.
I'll say add a filter
and I want to extract
just the top 10.
So I can say is between one and 10.
And I'll apply that filter.
There we go.
There's our top 10 happiest countries
in 2019.
Now, a really cool feature
that's currently available in Python
and coming very soon to R
is if you look up here
at the very top,
you'll see convert to code.
So as you do like sorting
and filtering
and other transformations
to your data set
here in the data viewer,
if you want to make that repeatable
and reproducible,
you can simply click this button
and it will actually spit out,
in this case,
some pandas code
so you can replicate
what you've done to that data.
And I think that's
a really cool feature
that you only find in Positron.
All right.
So let me go ahead back in here.
And what we're going to do next
is I'm going to open up
another Corda document.
So we've been dealing with Python so far.
I'm going to close out of this one.
We're going to open up
this R.qmd file,
which in a lot of ways
is similar to that same document.
All right.
If I run that first code cell again,
it will create another
happiness data variable here.
It automatically switches me
back over to R,
which I think is super cool.
And we're going to scroll down
a little bit more
and we're going to create a plot.
So here in this Corda document,
starting on line 25,
we're creating a ggplot,
looking at this happiness data,
and we're going to go ahead and run it.
Uh-oh, we got an error message.
So if you look down here in the console,
it looks like we got an error message
saying happiness data not found.
Okay.
So this is like,
you know,
somewhat intuitive error message.
But for those that are developers,
you'll know that sometimes
error messages aren't typically helpful.
So in order to debug this issue,
we're actually going to use
the help of Positron Assistant.
So again, Positron Assistant
is this robot face over here.
So let me go ahead and click on it.
And I'll expand out the window,
give a little bit more space.
And here you can see
Positron Assistant.
It's actually already been configured
with AWS Bedrock.
But if you needed to set it up
for the first time
or change your models,
you can select this dropdown
and select add model provider.
So here in this demo environment,
you can see again,
we have some models
that we're testing out.
Anthropic being the main one.
Here internally,
we also use AWS Bedrock.
But this is hopefully again,
in the future,
we will support additional models
for you to test out here.
Okay.
So we have this error message
and we don't really know
how to fix it just yet.
And so what we're going to do
is we're going to give a message
down here to Positron Assistant.
And what I don't have to do
is I don't have to copy in the code.
I don't need to copy the error message.
I can just come down here and say,
help me fix the error.
Something like that.
And I know it's a little hard to see,
but you can also see down here
that we've added some context to this.
And a lot of times
it just picks it up already.
So you can see it's already knows
I'm using R.
And it's already is using
this R.QMD file.
It's currently active
by active editor here.
And if you wanted to add
additional context,
maybe some other files
or data sets in your directory,
you can do that as well.
But again, Positron Assistant
out of the box
will have more context.
Like it'll be able to see my console
and actually interpret the error message.
So with that,
let's go ahead and run it
and see what we get.
All right.
You can see as it's finishing here,
it's used one reference.
That's my quarter QMD file.
And let's read the error message.
So it says the error occurs
because the code references
happiness data.
So that's right.
On line 25,
you can see happiness data,
but the data frame is named happiness.
Okay.
So that's where I made a mistake.
You can see my variable
is actually called happiness,
but my code is referencing
happiness data.
And then it actually gives us
a little code suggestion,
which is great.
Now, if we want to try
running this code
and see if it works,
you can click the little play button
right above it.
So I'll do that.
Uh-oh.
It looks like we got
another error message.
Object gray 70 not found.
Yeah.
It looks like we're trying
to make a color gray 70,
but like, why is that not working?
Gray 70 is a valid color.
Let's go ahead and ask
positron assistant.
And I'll just say,
what's wrong now?
Question mark.
Again, I don't need to provide
much other context.
All right.
The color gray 70 needs quotes
since it's a string.
So there we go.
I forgot my quotes.
And now it provides
another code of suggestion.
I can try running it.
And there we go.
We actually can see our plot
directly here within positron.
Again, another really cool feature
of positron.
And it looks like we have
GDP on the X axis
and happiness on the Y axis.
And all these individual circles
represent countries in 2019.
All right.
So this seems to be working,
which is great.
So now it's time to actually
bring that code
into our active editor.
We want to replace this erroneous code
with the new code.
So by hovering my mouse
over this code chunk,
I can select the second button
called apply an editor.
And I'll select the active
R.QMB file.
And what it's going to do
is positron assistant
finds inside of this
core to a document
where this code needs to be put in.
And will actually give us a diff.
And here you can see it.
So a diff essentially gives you control
as a data scientist.
So you always remain in control.
The opportunity to either reject
or accept a change suggested
by positron assistant.
Anything in red is being deleted.
Anything in green will be
new lines of code.
So I know this is what I want.
So we could select this individual one
or we can just keep all the suggestions.
And I'll select that.
And there we go.
And if I rerun the code cell,
you can see it just generated
the same plot again.
But a really cool feature of positron
is you see all the various
plots you've been creating.
You kind of get this really nice timeline
you can go back to.
All right.
That's really cool.
So we have this cool plot.
I would say it's cool.
But it could probably look
a little bit better.
All right.
It's kind of bland with like
these gray dots.
We don't know what these
various dots are.
So we're going to use positron
assistant specifically the inline editor.
Or inline suggester to make some
improvements to this up.
So I'm going to go ahead and place my
cursor just somewhere inside
of this plot here.
And I'm going to hit command I.
That brings up this positron
assistant prompt.
And I'm going to suggest something.
Again, you can kind of do
whatever you'd like here.
But maybe I want to label
all of the outliers and I plot.
And let's see what happens.
I'll hit enter.
It's going to think for a little bit
and it should provide code suggestions.
All right.
And you can see here, it's now actively
applying those edits directly to my code.
All right.
Now, before we, you know, either keep
or undo these suggestions,
we can rerun the code cell here
at the in the background.
And see what we get.
All right.
Well, it's OK.
It looks like we got one outlier.
So it's a little bit hard to see.
Let me pop out the plot here
into a different view.
And let's see what we get.
All right.
So we've got one outlier.
Pop out the plot here
into a separate pane.
There's Botswana all the way down there.
That appears to be the main outlier here.
So a pretty small change here.
But again, we didn't have to write any code
and it automatically labeled
this outlier for us,
which again is, I think, pretty cool.
So we can keep that.
But maybe I'll just go ahead and try
to make it a little bit more fun.
I'll open up the editor again
and I'll say label
where the USA is on my plot.
And I'll say make it red
just to give it a different color.
You also see I made a typo there.
Or maybe I didn't.
But if you have typos, it's totally fine.
All right.
So there we go.
It's giving us some more suggestions.
Let's see if I can run it here.
Hey, it's again, not super great here.
But you can see United States
appears to be up here at the very top.
So it's certainly an improvement.
And we can just keep iterating
on this over and over
until you get that plot
that you just love.
And again, you stay in control.
And that way the Positron Assistant
is designed to work
is that it's mostly going to be
a lot of back and forth
between you and your Positron Assistant.
Now to give you one more example
of Positron Assistant
is that I'm actually going to come down here
to my Corridor document.
And I'm going to insert another code cell
by clicking this button here at the top.
All right.
So now we get this blank code cell.
And I'm going to ask it
to create something from scratch.
So I'll do Command-I.
And I'm going to tell it to
create a colorful GT table.
And if you're not familiar with GT,
it's this really awesome package
we developed internally here at Posit
for creating publication quality tables.
So I'll say create a colorful GT table
of the top 10 happiest countries.
Let's see what it does.
All right.
It's starting to generate.
It goes pretty quick.
All right.
We have a suggestion.
I'm just going to go ahead and keep it.
Let's see what we get.
All right.
So that's not too bad.
And it's also worth noting that GT
usually by default would create
like essentially HTML tables,
which is why it actually switched over
to our viewer
because we're now viewing
essentially like an HTML widget.
And here we can see the top 10
happiest countries
and their associated happiness score,
which is really great.
So now we have a Quarto document
that does some data transformation.
It creates this plot.
And then we have a really nice table.
Maybe we want to send this report
to somebody else.
So what we can do
is we can click the preview button,
which will actually render it
to an HTML document.
So let's go ahead and do that.
You'll see Positron switches
over to our terminal,
run some Quarto commands
in the background.
We should be able to view
our Quarto document over here.
There it is.
This is our finish.
I mean, we can certainly try
to improve it a little bit,
but this looks pretty good
right out of the box.
We have a nice table here.
Here's some text.
Here's that plot that we created,
which we could probably
use some improvements.
But then we also get
a really nice table down here
at the very bottom.
Now, if we wanted to,
we could take this document
and we could publish it
to PositConnect.
And then when it's hosted on Connect,
we could share it
just like you would share
any other website.
You can do that by clicking
this little Posit publisher icon.
That's one way to do that.
You'll see there's also
an icon over here.
Now, for today's demo,
we're not actually going
to show that,
but that's how you can actually
use this really cool extension
that we built to publish
things to PositConnect
with the click of a button.
But if we wanted to,
we could also, again,
here you can see
all the changes
that we've been making
are tracked here
in version control.
We could commit them
and push them up
to our GitHub repository
and share it with another colleague
if we wanted to.
Okay, so that is
Positron Assistant.
So now we're going to switch
gears over to DataBot.
Now, in order to open DataBot,
we actually need to leverage
the command palette.
To do that, again,
you can click up here at the top
and do show and run commands,
but I like to kind of enforce
the keyboard shortcut
of Command-Shift-P.
And to open DataBot,
we're going to select
Open DataBot.
That's the command.
All right, here is DataBot.
And it's going to give us
a little welcome screen here.
And again, just to emphasize,
DataBot is available
as an extension.
So I click on the extensions here
and I delete Python.
You'll see DataBot
here at the very top.
All right, so let me go ahead
and clear or kind of hide
some of my windows
so we can have DataBot showing up.
And just DataBot.
All right, so here is DataBot
and it is now ready
to start exploring our data.
Now, let me actually pop open
our file explorer one more time,
because up to now,
we've essentially just focused in
on this 2019 CSV file.
But you'll notice
there's actually happiness data
for various years,
from 2015 to 2019.
And I really haven't explored
any of this data,
nor do I know how to combine them
all into one single data set.
And that's where DataBot
can really shine.
So I'm going to go ahead
and come down here
to the very bottom.
And I'm going to ask
DataBot a question.
I'm going to say,
I have CSV files in my project
for various years
that correspond to
happiness of countries.
Again, you don't have to worry
about typos.
Can you combine them
and explore the data?
Again, this whole idea
behind DataBot
is that it's designed
for exploratory data analysis.
So let me go ahead and run this.
I'll submit this to DataBot.
It's also worth noting
I am using R here,
but if you wanted
to switch over to Python,
you could do that.
DataBot works perfectly well
with R and Python.
So let me go ahead and hit enter.
DataBot's going to do
some thinking here.
All right, it's first asking,
you know, what CSV files
are available in my project.
You can see it found them
from 2015 to 2019.
And then we get
this yellow message.
And I think this is a really
cool feature of DataBot.
The way that it works
is it tends to be
a little bit autonomous
where it will just write R
and Python code on your behalf
and execute that code.
And we fully realized
that that for some
data science teams,
that may not be OK.
So if you ever need to
decline certain code
from being running
or you just want to back
out of DataBot,
you can decline here.
If you want to essentially audit
every single piece
of code suggestion
provided by DataBot,
you can allow just once.
Or you can allow always
if you trust DataBot.
And for today's demo,
that's what we're going to do.
So let's go ahead
and I'll say allow always.
And we'll let DataBot
work its magic.
All right, you can see
it's running some R code.
It interprets it.
And then it gives you
some prompts here.
And it'll move pretty quick here.
So I'll try to keep up.
All right, so now it's
combining the CSV files.
And what's cool,
if you look down here
in the console,
we got an error message.
And it's saying
there's some inconsistencies
in the data format across years.
That can be a very challenging task
for a data scientist
if you're trying to merge data,
but the data set's
not consistent across
the various column names,
for example.
All right, so it's trying
to run some more code.
It potentially got another error.
DataBot's very nice.
It apologizes.
And it's going to keep
trying to find
some additional ways around.
It's still going.
Again, it's a lot of trial and error,
but DataBot's really good
at this stuff.
So we'll just give it
a little bit more time.
All right, it looks like
it now combined the data,
which is great.
And it looks like it's going
to create some visualizations
for us to explore
trends and patterns.
All right, let's take a look
at this first one,
see if it's helpful.
All right, so it's
trying to find some
additional ways around.
And it's going to keep
trying to find some
that are helpful.
All right, so it looks like
it pulled out a few countries,
maybe like it was like
the top 10 happiest countries
and their trends
from 2018, 2019.
And then we can scroll down
a little bit more.
And this looks like
happiness on the Y-axis
and GDP on the X-axis.
Looking at this
at the past two years here,
potentially more of the NA.
All right, now it's created
a bunch of visualizations.
It ran some code.
And now it's giving us
a little summary
of what it's found.
All right, so based
on the analysis,
here's some key findings.
Top 10 countries in 2019.
So go Finland.
GDP and happiness relationships.
It does appear to be
a strong correlation
between GDP and happiness.
Maybe some exceptions,
trends over time,
contributing factors.
So yeah, it gives you
a lot of insights
into your data.
But then another cool thing
is that DataBot
will typically provide
suggestions of what
maybe you want to do next.
Or you can come in here
the text box
and ask it anything you want.
So what I want to do here,
looking at some
of these suggestions.
Well, let's actually
look at this plot.
So if I open up
my plot pane down here,
you'll see there's
all these various countries.
Something I think
is kind of interesting
is that it does appear
there's some countries
that have a really high GDP,
but not necessarily
the highest happiness score.
So what's going on
maybe with these countries
down here?
We can ask it that question.
So I'll say,
what's going on
with the countries
that have high GDP,
but less than
expected happiness score?
All right, let's see
what it finds.
All right, still thinking.
Again, it ran some more R code.
And here we go.
I picked out some of
those countries here
that have, again,
lower happiness score,
but fairly high GDP.
All right, so that's
a really nice plot.
I like that one a lot.
Now it's going to analyze
those outliers.
And now it's providing
a summary here.
All right, so most are wealthy
Asian or Middle Eastern nations.
All right, just reading
through some of this stuff.
Yeah, so it's interesting here
that it's talking about,
like it starts getting
to like personal freedom,
social support systems,
low corruption levels.
I think that's really cool
because nowhere in this data
does it talk about like,
you know, certain aspects
because the model
that we're using
in this case is anthropic.
It is trained on the internet.
So it can help kind of
pull out information
that's maybe not in your data
that can be really insightful
for exploring your data.
So I'm looking at some
of these other suggestions,
but maybe for the sake of time,
we'll just kind of wrap up
our exploratory
data analysis here.
And I just want to talk
through one more thing.
You can go through,
you know, hours and hours
of playing around with data bot.
But ultimately, you know,
the idea here is that
you get satisfied
with the findings.
You now know everything
you need to know
about this data,
and you probably want
to summarize what you found.
Now, scrolling through
this entire chat
can be a little bit noisy.
So something we added
to data bot
is these slash commands.
So if we do a forward slash,
and in this case,
I'll do report,
which will generate
a quarto document.
We could do notebook
if we wanted to,
which will generate
a Jupyter notebook,
but I'll select report.
And that's all you need to do.
I can give it more context,
like how big of a report
you want it to make.
But I'll just say forward
slash report and hit enter.
All right.
So now it's actually
giving us an outline
for our summary.
It has like an introduction,
happiness patterns,
GDP conclusions.
And then it asked me,
would you like to proceed
by creating the report?
And I'll just say proceed
with creating the report
as outlined.
Now, I think this part's
really cool.
All right.
So it's going to create
this quarto document.
It opened it up for us,
and you can see it
is now being created
live right in front of us.
All right.
So this will take
a little bit of time,
but this document
will summarize
all the findings
that we just did
with Data Bot.
And then once it's done,
we could preview it.
We could publish it,
deposit, connect,
share with others,
and a really awesome feature.
All right.
But just for the sake of time,
let me come back
to the slides here
and just kind of wrap up here.
So hopefully you all
can see the power
of not just Positron,
but all these great AI
tools inside of it.
Now, Positron, again,
being optimized for data science,
and a lot of these AI tools
are also optimized
for data science,
which can be an extremely
helpful feature
and really just
superpower your workflows.
Positron, again,
is multilingual.
You can use R, Python.
And the idea here
is that as additional languages
come to the forefront
of data science
that we will be able
to easily integrate
them with Positron as well.
We do want to emphasize
that the way you interact
with these AI tools
in Positron is a
bring-your-own-model philosophy.
So we're not going to force you
to use, you know,
Anthropic or Gemini
or something like that.
You know, as we continue
to provide support
for additional models,
the idea is that
you can use whatever models
approved within your company
and bring it to the table.
And with all these
great AI features,
it just makes
working with projects easier
because you can use
Positron Assistant
to help create files,
modify them.
And then hopefully you saw
with DataBot
how fast you can do EDA.
Something that maybe
would take hours,
potentially days
to do as a data scientist.
We just did it
in a couple of minutes.
All right.
So with that,
that'll wrap up today's demo.
And we will see you
in the live Q&A.
Thanks, everybody.